So I know we're doing fine and this picks up as well.
I guess what strikes me, having read all the stuff that's been going on over there and reading the book and the reviews, it is almost a case of white imitating art.
Yeah, on penalties.
Maybe we can enter the discussion in this way.
find this amusing, ironic?
Well, I was quite happy with the opening premise, you know, way back in the story that this novel about literary envy seemed to be stirring up a lot of literary envy.
I was quite amused by that.
But, you know, later on, the ironies were oppressive, I thought.
particularly this one that Julian Barnes, you know, that a novel about literary enmity, the deal for that novel caused a literary enmity that wasn't there before.
It did, so you're acknowledging that.
Yeah.
And I think that's not it.
That's no great news break or anything.
And that began to give me the creeps a bit, that that should have, you know, that the,
The novel turned out to be a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy in that one area that did alarm me.
And I do get the feeling every now and then that I'm in some kind of postmodern trap or joke.
Not altogether pleasant feeling.
But really I'm, by now, I'm sort of bored blind by those.
What was the word again?
Bored flying inside a guy that's been following me around.
Really, I think the story isn't... There is no story.
This fuss really isn't a manufacturer.
I think we're here, and this is how you find it.
The guy's trying to get his money for it.
I mean, get what he's worth.
What's wrong with that?
So then you have to step back and say that the story is
about England or about the British press or about certain elements in the British character.
It is those energies that have manufactured a scandal or a fuss about pretty well nothing.
So I try to turn it around and see it as a story about England rather than a story about me.
And the New Yorker piece,
I think it's Oprah, who says, at least it indicates that people still care about literary stories and stuff.
That's a paraphrase.
Yeah, I don't think it does indicate that.
I think, well, literature.
I think I wrote it down.
I just had a period of time.
Literature still rouses great passion.
I think money still rouses great passion.
But you could, I mean, the most...
flattering way to look at it from my point of view is that in England to be a writer who makes any kind of impact is going to be a kind of tawdry impact because that's the only thing the media are capable of processing is tawdryness.
They process it, they add to it, they manufacture it.
At the top of this
turret, exposed turret of British writers, Salman Rushdie, who has been, you know, treated lamentably by the British press for six years.
And I'm way down the turret, but there's no one in between me and Sam Ra.
Yeah, I mean, I'm getting a kind of very qualitative and relatively, completely harmless version of what he gets, which is, um,
torrent of resentful jeering from the British press.
You like to think it's because I've made an impact somehow, and this is the only form an impact can now take.
Coarse, vulgar, carping.
Do you think they're coming at you strictly because of the reports of...
the money and the agents.
Or do you think that if it hadn't have been this, I mean, you've got this thing about the teeth, which is preposterous.
What's wrong with fixing your teeth?
Yeah, and it's not.
My daughter's going out for braces, and they're going to cost me a fortune.
But you do it because she needs them.
I do.
Yeah, and you know, it's not an offer.
I didn't have any choice about it.
It wasn't the kind of cosmetic.
Well, I don't even know why you should have to.
Explain it.
What the hell has that got to do with, as Bobby Fischer said, has that got to do with chess?
Yeah.
You said that about anything, I guess.
Would you like to try some of these?
Yes, another one, please.
I'm fine, thanks.
Yeah, can I get some?
Please help yourself.
Thank you.
Why don't you just take a dish?
No, no, no, please.
Let's get some lemon.
Mmm.
This is much more generous than I anticipated.
Make a dish.
You've got to swallow those.
Before I use my... put a bunch of them here.
That'd be great.
Yeah, I mean, one likes to think that it would have... You like the bodies too?
Yeah.
That it would have taken some other form.
Do you have a spoon?
I've got a spoon.
Why don't you just take some of that?
Great.
Thank you.
I'm all set.
But anyway, it's... The resentment is real.
Was Wyatt a surprise?
Or I think looking at it now, it's kind of predictable.
It's all right now.
She actually went in a sweet letter.
Kind of apologizing and regretting the whole thing.
I mean,
I think she was more or less the only writer in England who didn't want me to get the deal.
She went a little crazy.
You certainly don't have to say that.
That was everything, Jim.
Excellent.
Thank you.
These are wonderful.
The other aspect of it touched on in the New Yorker piece, which I really don't expect to follow me around America, is
for some reason, old, vestigial, latent, anti-American feelings were... Yeah, I didn't... In the New Yorker piece, he was suggesting that you were... You were being accused of fratting, and it's like, you know, these women who went out with the occupying Nazis turned to be quite too lucky, quite nice to look.
If I'd gone on holiday, they would accuse me of being a traitor.
But really, I think it's almost inexplicable, except to English people.
It's damn hard to explain to English people, too.
Have you seen the film, the newspaper?
No, I wanted to see that one.
Yeah, you'd like it.
Yeah, it's really, really fun.
And I spent a lot of years in the newspaper business.
It's one of the few that seems to have it.
But the guy who's this one public, this guy was in charge of parking, and he's been in front of these really terrible tabloid poems.
He says, why me, why me?
And he says, because it was your turn, you know?
I'm wondering if maybe, you know, maybe they saw a good story here.
What was the public reaction?
Were they eating this up over there?
Well, I guess they were, because every paper was just doing it.
It's not exactly like a princess died, you know, for the weekend or something.
I'll never get to the bottom of it, but I can narrow it down in that... It's not the advance.
And this can be proved as far as... A writer of the same publisher, two or three years ago, got an advance for two books for £400,000, and there wasn't a word about it.
Who was that writer?
Jim Crace.
C-R-A-C.
So it can't be to do with that, right?
Because they tell me there's a sort of tripwire that goes on around $430,000, $40,000, where suddenly you can't do that.
But you see, you tell me who he is, and I say Jim Who, but we all know who Martin Amos is, and we know who your father is.
And so, you know, it was...
Yeah, so there's a bit more tabloid recognition involved there.
And, of course, you did have this image, whether deserved or undeserved, that's irrelevant, kind of the, uh, Juan Caribe, I guess, or the bad boy.
Yeah.
Yes, I go on being the boy, because I'm still on being the son.
But, um, I think it must have something to do with me and my father.
That's it.
In what respect?
Is it just about you, your father's son, or is this spectacular?
I think it must be that because that's one thing that does single me out and awakens kind of feelings, perhaps, that it's all been too easy for me and that kind of thing.
No one's suggesting that I get my novels published because I'm hidden.
I was going to say, well, you've written your books, right?
Nobody's written them for you.
And let me say, let me go on the record, I will say this at a piece, for all the, and we've been hearing about this book and this stuff for a long time, so the anticipation for me was that the book is great.
I think it really happens to be worth the hype that it's getting.
This doesn't happen very often.
I like the book, and very shortly, because I'm even getting as bored as you must be discussing this.
I don't see it.
There's nothing there.
I'm trying to examine what the big deal is all about, so I do have to get a few quotes on it.
I'm sure there's nothing that you haven't said and haven't gone over.
I would like at some point to talk about, because I have read, it is interesting, that where both you and your father
write improductively at the same time.
I don't know if it's unique in the history of speaking literature.
Do you really have to press the plants in some other parallels?
I think you do.
And I think the conventional thing is that writer-sons is writer-fathers.
Write one or two books.
and then have the grace to shut up and disappear.
And I think it must be galling to some that that hasn't happened in this case.
The only case I can think of, American case, but then again, Cheever was Cheever and his son Ben.
But Ben, I don't think, published his first novel until after his father died.
Susan had a couple of books.
Yeah.
Yeah, but not a kind of more or less equivalent.
Oh, no.
Well, you both did quite seriously at the same time.
I mean, he's still quite alive and writing and producing.
He is.
And that is, did you see Machico's review in the New York Times?
I did, yes.
It was a really nice review.
Yes, wasn't it?
And she did find some residents from one of your father's novels.
Yeah.
And did you agree with that?
And I'm going to ask you to come and have a lot of reviews with it.
It was a pretty interesting observation, I think.
I was certainly aware of one or two little glances of Lucky Jim.
I wonder if she was thinking of the same bit.
She didn't say, at least.
I agreed with the Tom Wolfe stuff, to a degree.
To a degree, and I'll explain why.
For me, because The Bonfire of the Vanity is as much a novel about New York as it was anything else.
And this is a novel of suburban life.
That's true, and there is sort of the underside impinging on the... Yeah.
I mean, it's not Vanity Fair, but nevertheless, it is...
It is life in the city.
That's right.
And the high and the low element.
Exactly.
I think that's what Wolfe is doing.
Yeah.
One of the many things.
Yeah, I like that book very much.
Fantastically.
Yeah.
I enjoy it.
He's taken a long time.
Yeah.
Now, this is five years, they say, in the making, on the best lap.
Did you, according to another piece I read, this is, you, you,
Of course, it is a novel about midlife crisis.
Can we project and say, you know, maybe this is something that you yourself are experiencing in some manner?
Oh, yeah.
I mean... What is the nature of your midlife crisis?
I'm curious.
I mean, other than... I'm not really interested in domestic problems, but as a professional, as a writer.
Well, when you have a midlife crisis,
You know, your life is shaken up.
It's not that you intend to shake it up, but these things nonetheless happen willy-nilly.
You know, and I've had some pretty classic symptoms of the midnight crisis.
A health crisis, you know, a separate, you know, end of a marriage.
The various...
comparatively, minor sundering to do with my agent, my publisher.
My agent is a very old friend.
Your current agent or the former agent?
Former agent, but the agent part of it is a business relationship.
I believe
I believed I could go on being friends with her, and I believed I could go on being friends with Julie.
It seemed to me not remarkable if that had taken place, if we'd gone on being friends.
I mean, it was a kind of messy switch.
This must be the principal... I mean, the most unhappy consequence of this whole thing is what one must assume is the fracture of a friendship.
But I didn't know I was going to...
It would have seemed to me just as intelligible if Julian had written to me saying, let's not let this affect our friendship.
In other words, I didn't calculate on losing his friendship.
Well, you made a business to say that.
Yeah.
Exactly.
What does the lawyer say?
I mean, the lawyer who defends himself as a rule for a client.
I mean, you can extend that.
You should never do business with friends, you know, for instance.
I mean, because it becomes personal.
I mean, what does it say?
You made a decision.
I would assume that your interests were better served by bringing in somebody else.
That's my take on it.
Yeah.
Period, paragraph, next case.
My agent is the guy who got Luke Gingrich four and a half million dollars.
Wouldn't I have loved... You had to give it back, didn't you?
Well, you didn't have to, but...
I talked to my agent about this, and he said, well, he said, we'll make that.
I mean, they didn't rescind the deal.
All they did was rescind the advance.
Right.
Their confidence, certainly, that they'll get the advance is nice.
And when I got for an advance, it seems to me an advance is an advance.
I mean, you take it literally.
If you earn, if you make money, you make money, right?
Yeah.
It's nice to get a big thing, if you can get it.
Andrew Waddy says, if you ever get a royalty check, something's gone wrong.
I think it will do well, though.
How is it doing at England, by the way?
I think it's still something that could be talented.
What's a bestseller over there?
There was enough to get a number one fiction harlot for a couple of weeks.
In England, anything over 20,000, 20,000 of us.
Maybe we could talk a bit about that.
I mean, you are correctly regarded as a literary writer.
You know, I tried to get an interview with John Updike once, and he wrote me a interview.
He hates to do interviews, and I respect that.
Ann Taller has never given any interviews.
Before, he said, you know, I'm not the one who's getting paid for this article.
He wrote me a long, furious letter.
He invited me to ask him some factual questions by letter, which I did.
And then he wrote back.
He was furious.
And then they quoted a letter.
But the thrust of what he was saying is, hey, we're all writing for money.
My time is money.
Don't waste my time with this.
Did you ask him questions that you could have answered yourself?
No, I asked him some questions that I really did try to engage him with.
He wanted what he called factual questions.
You can probably do those and get those out of the file.
Which is ridiculous, yeah.
This is quite a few years ago.
It was fun.
I have the letter.
It's a great one.
Anyway, Updike is one of our greatest, well, I mean, there's a great judgment, but I like him.
Oh, yeah.
Nobody knocks him.
I mean, have you ever seen all the signed limited things that he does?
No.
He has the world record.
He's got about 800 of them.
What are they?
You know, these little things that they do 150.
It might be some piece that never got into the New Yorker or got into the New Yorker.
And they will do these signed limited editions of these little... They collect it?
Yeah, but they get 150 bucks a whack for them.
And he does them by the dozen.
Really?
And I mentioned this in my book.
There's a guy in New York, Carter Burden, who I described.
He's got hundreds of pieces.
I've got too many to quit on him now.
I can't afford to quit on him.
Nobody whacks up for this.
We're wanting to make a little money out of this.
What the hell are we doing it for?
We love it.
Fine.
I've got kids, you've paid kids.
We have to support them.
My kids have to sit problems that I have to address.
Nobody's going to rape me over the poles, I hope.
I'm deciding what my children deserve for $5,000 worth in dental work.
This is preposterous to me.
It's totally preposterous.
Once the hostile appetite is awakened, then anything you do is, you know,
is grist.
So let's think, he's having a lot of dental work.
That must be because he's vain, that he wants to grin for photographers.
And when I was embarking on all this dental treatment and staggering around the streets of New York, sort of spitting right into the pavement, I thought, I knew this was going to be unpleasant, all this dental work.
But I didn't know I was going to get dumped on by every paper in England.
And also, I mean, they thought, in the anti-American vein, they thought, American dentists, American agents, American girlfriends, aren't all dentists good enough for you?
Haven't we got enough blow torches?
Good enough for you.
Could I use that as a quote, by the way?
I mean, I put words in your mouth on that.
No, no.
Well, then my wife is American, too.
Do you roll these?
Yeah, I do.
I used to smoke cigars.
Well, I gave them up.
Did you give them up because you had to?
No, I had to.
I smoked it for 20 years when I was back in the Navy and started it.
I figured 20 years, maybe 20,000, 30,000 cigars I gave it.
When I smoked... You were in heaven.
It's a great nostalgic, awakening smell.
So they thought about that and they thought,
Okay, he lives in Manhattan with his new girlfriend, having abandoned his children.
It's really untrue.
But he spends a lot of time in America to become, lives in America.
And that's good because it means I must have abandoned my children.
Is that your name?
I think so, yeah.
Thank you.
It was delicious.
It was good.
But then, since we are living in the postmodern age and perception is all, etc.
I didn't say, during the initial start, I didn't say a word to anyone of the press.
And then when publication neared, I did of course a lot of interviews.
And I commented on the treatment I've had so far and say I was scandalized by it and I didn't stop to think about it.
And there's a whole lot of wave of pieces about whether I was right to be scandalised for that.
And all the journalists decided on the whole not, that I shouldn't complain.
But another English thing is, if you do get a chunk of money like that, then you can damn well put up with anything else.
And a lot of the things, the tone of them, the poor little rich boy my nose has been complaining about his people.
What am I supposed to say?
That they've treated me very sweetly and sympathetically?
Do you feel that you're a better person?
I mean, this is such a cliche question.
Are you bemused by this whole thing?
Are you bruised by it?
I was bruised by the tone of some of the reviews simply because I'm not used to being... I think it's a good thing to get 50-50 reviews.
The best kind of reviews are violently pro and violently anti.
You don't want all to be good because then you're being sort of gathered into the commonality in a way that good writers shouldn't have once be.
Well, are they reviewing the book or are they reviewing the story?
They're reviewing the book.
But that's good.
It's so soured by everything that I'm not used to being written about as if I'm no good at all.
Even the old hostile reviews they used to get, saying that he was misusing his talent or something.
But I got several reviews of this book, saying that this is as if the book had been written for money.
And of course, the book was finished before any negotiations began.
I was shocked by that.
Otherwise, you know, the old American phrase, what doesn't clearly makes you stronger,
uh and after all you know we are just talking about there are no sticks and stones so far as this being words there are worse fates did you see this as a as your best shot yet i hate to say commercial novel but it's certainly something that might reach a broader yeah i did i felt it was a it was a in a way quieter and um
less tricksy novel.
It was about more recognizable and clearly universal concerns than some of its predecessors.
And I do think that my readership in England is slightly ghettoized.
Cultish.
Ghettoized.
It's touched on in the book that I've done co-signing, where I look at my cue, and I look at the cues of others.
And I think I want some of them in my cue.
My cue is sort of rather punky and wild-eyed, you know.
In England, not so much for America.
And I think actually, you know, older readers would like my stuff too.
But they're put off by this kind of bad boy image.
So I did feel that they had a chance of roping into more readers.
And whatever is said, it's not the advance, it's not anything else.
What you want is reading.
A writer is nothing without a reader.
He's only half a circle.
And I admit to being ravenous and gluttonous for readers.
I want as many as I can get.
So I did feel that I could get a whole new section of the populace.
When we were trying to sell my book, I was saying to my agent, I said, does the amount of the advance mean anything?
Because you have to earn anything naively.
he said it means a lot they said because if they have a great state in the book they're going to toss their ass to make it to make sure they're publicized they get it fast and you know they're going to work if they've only got uh 50 grand or something in you which is a lot of money they'll think it's nice if it does well but no harm it doesn't take much to earn out and so we don't really have to kill ourselves and they can and
It can be a successful work.
It might even take off, but who knows?
Without us doing much about it, it might take off.
So it does really behoove them to get behind it.
And so that, I think...
That's very much the thinking.
Was that part of it with you when we were talking about the midlife crisis?
Was it a sense of worth?
Yeah.
Of demonstrating to yourself absolute worth?
In those very words, I'll put it to myself.
Is that right?
Yeah.
You want to know, you know, I thought I'm never going to be 45 again with a, with maybe I'll never have a big novel again.
You know, an novel that's taken so long to write.
I'm repeatedly, I'm repeatedly singled out as
You know, the most imitated writer of my generation, whatever that means.
The most influential writer of my generation.
In England?
In England.
So why not, you know, also you think, in a kind of innocent way, you think, well, Ian McEwan, my friend, got a big one, a few novels back.
Well, how about a big one for me?
Do you accept that characterization that you are, the writer of yours?
I think I'm the most imitated, but I don't know probably what that means.
I'll tell you who I interviewed years ago over at the Ritz.
It was this Jason Epps thing.
Do you remember that?
Jacob.
Jacob?
Yeah.
Jason was the father.
Jason's the father.
Yeah, yeah.
He imitated me a bit.
Well, you've not heard anything about that kid.
I know that he's an extremely successful scriptwriter.
Really?
He writes L.A.
Law and stuff like that.
No kidding.
Yeah.
He's a whole lot richer than me, and good luck to him.
I had to be the guy on the tape.
But he said it's amazing to him the money that the scriptwriters make.
They're doing 120-page treatment, but they do it.
They do have a skill.
They're able to do it.
There's a lot of people trying to do it.
Scott Fitzgerald, I mean, you want to go back, I mean, Dave and Faulkner.
Faulkner couldn't do it.
I think it's more successful than Fitzgerald.
No, I mean, everything's relative.
the real anomaly is this that um while this was all just settling down um or the the deal at any rate had been done i went to los angeles to interview john travolta and he's been very clever with his money travolta and it emerged he's you know hugely rich and got three airplanes three airplanes and i was thinking
I was thinking, I don't resent him having that, you know, good luck to him, but I was thinking, he's got three aeroplanes and I drive a rabbit.
He's got a Gulfstream, I've got a rabbit.
And he really hasn't done much since this recent movie.
Right, no, he's a comeback.
But then I thought, but no one minds that, in England or America, Joshua, they're being wonderfully rich.
So it turns out, does it not, that
The literary novel is the only human activity that one shouldn't get well rewarded for.
Do you remember that?
You don't remember, but back in the 50s and 60s, I was quite a jazz band.
There would be certain groups that you enjoyed enormously, and then they would say, well, they're selling them.
Yeah, I've heard that phrase used in me.
In other words, they're going mainstream.
They're actually going to try and emerge from poverty and stop eating potato chips for the lives of living in them.
and the carrots, and the rats.
But even that, you see, is something that I think is nonsensical to say of me, that I'm selling out.
Because selling out when?
I wrote that novel as I would have written any other novel, my next novel, and then put that to one side, and then did the negotiation.
They weren't connected.
The novel wasn't written to be sold, so to speak.
No.
two separate activities, one not.
And the fact is, and then we will leave the subject, and get the book itself, which is a considerably important thing.
If somebody doesn't, maybe this, I should think it applies in England, but here, you know, willing buyer, willing seller.
If they don't want to give you the money, nobody's putting a gun into their heads.
I mean, if somebody wants to pay a baseball player $5 million a year, a semi-literate baseball player,
and they're paying them to the player.
I don't have to buy tickets to win another game.
You don't have to do this.
But they do it.
You know why?
Because they bought this guy Ken Seiko here in Boston.
He fills the park.
They make the money back in two weeks.
So they know what they're doing.
So he brings success to the property.
That's right.
Whatever.
Well, it's whatever.
Nobody had to do that in such a ridiculously rudimentary observation.
I'm embarrassed to make it.
Is this a watershed book for you, in your view?
It sort of feels like it, yeah.
Now we are making a transition to the writing, to the writing and to the book.
Sure.
It does feel that way.
I don't know what my next novel will be, although I have a handful of short stories I'm keen to write.
Keen to write or keen to publish?
Keen to write.
It feels like the end of a kind of informal trilogy with the two other long novels I've written, London Fields and Money.
And they're all West London novels, basically, with a kind of American presence in each of them.
But I'm moving out of West London now, and I'm moving to North West London.
And I don't know how significant that sort of two or three mile shift is going to be.
But I kind of felt...
that I've come to the end of that.
You know, I'd call it an informal trilogy, but you have a countervailing suspicion that actually these are just the sort of novels I'm going to write.
Longish books with recurring themes.
What are the recurring themes that make them, in your mind, the trilogy?
They're all... They all have a...
There are about uncertain identities monitored by a kind of writer figure.
There's always a writer figure or a me figure as well, manipulating
manipulating and humiliating a little truth of rheumatist personality.
Through a recurring motif to me, it's just a feeling I have, a sense that this is one long novel, split up.
although they're all, you know, interdependent, too, and independent.
With Nadine Gortimer, while she was here doing some lectures at Harvard, and she's quite, as you know, quite a prolific writer, but she feels that everything, she made a comparison, like, there's one statue, and for her it's like walking around and seeing the same story or the same statue from different angles, and it really is a corpus.
and everything is, well, I don't expect metaphors here, but it's, you know, all parts of the same.
And do you feel that way, that maybe it is, if you are writing one of you?
I think maybe I'm staring at the statue from the same angle, but with failing eyesight.
You know, I interviewed Graham Greene years ago.
Yeah, it was great.
And I thought, you know,
P is almost the paradigm of this.
You have your own country, in his case, for Greenland, usually.
And this is your patch, this is all you need.
You need one adulterer, you need one pamper tower, etc.
You need one failed holy man.
And all that changes is that you get older as you write about it.
Well, the perceptions must change.
Perceptions change through time, but the actual address of the eye... I mean, this novel certainly wasn't possible for you at the age of 30.
Yeah, sure.
I think it had to be undertaken by a man in his early 40s.
Yeah.
And is that fair?
Absolutely, yeah.
I couldn't have written it until I'd arrived then.
And in fact, you know, the book is... I felt very much, as I was coming to the end of my 30s, I used to feel...
not arrogantly, but kind of wearily, that I understood everything.
People were almost ridiculously transparent to me.
I knew what they were thinking.
And then suddenly, around about the age of 40, I thought, I don't know anything about anything anymore.
Because I'm now in a new country.
I don't know how to use the currency.
I don't know how to use the subway.
My head has been emptied out.
And this is really because
what you know up until around 40 years of no use to you with the second half of life.
You have to learn a whole new set of rules.
And that book is an attempt to sort of, to grope towards some kind of information about the second half of life.
The second half of life which is much more shadowed by death than the first half.
Well, the shadow of death is really just a rumour.
Did you see it also as being a funny novel?
Oh, yeah.
I don't... Is it satire in your room?
I've not seen it described as such.
Well, what would it be satirizing?
It would be satirizing in the literary world.
I do exaggerate deliberately to search for comedy, but Northrop Frye describes satire of militant irony in that it's irony that is attempting to bring about some change.
like Swift's modest proposal definitely had a sort of political age.
And I don't think I, I never feel I'm doing that.
I think it's, it's sharp and blank.
But I think I'm incapable of writing anything that isn't basically comic in premise.
in some way.
Even the novel I wrote about the Holocaust has a great deal of irony in it.
I'd be ashamed to call it a comedy, but nonetheless it uses the devices of comedy.
Do you remember, what was the Netflix film, the producers?
Yeah.
That's the springtime reel.
That's the Hitler.
Looking at them doing the Swiss together.
Wonderful movie.
Wonderful.
Thank you very much.
And you have asserted that this is most definitely not a Romano play.
Yeah.
I wouldn't be interested in writing a minimalist short story, actually.
I make things up.
That's what I like to do.
The idea of spending five years lampooning your friends seems to me.
That's the frivolity.
No, that's just a way to make it a gossip item.
Were there models from each of the writers?
Yes, but they both come from inside me.
No matter how much attention you're getting,
The novelists are always feeling pitifully neglected.
This is your version of a Dr. Jekyll, Mr. Hyde Tech?
Yeah, that's right, and I do that all the time.
So you think that these both are aspects of yourself?
All my novels are Jekyll and Hyde, to divide itself.
Doubles, and secret sharers.
Have you said that to anybody yet?
Not quite that way.
And the very fact that, you know, the boys are twins, I thought.
They're inescapable, you know.
They're born a day apart, Gwyn and Richard a day apart.
They're the same people.
They're cut in two.
It's all been my practice, even now, of immersion and retrospective.
take a little bit of myself and then magnify it and imagine it's all there is.
So the character can be constructed out of time.
I thought as we... Hi, how are you?
How are you?
Good.
What's our time?
Oh, a little more time.
Okay.
I want to shoot a couple of pictures of him outside.
Outside?
Because it's lovely.
It's so nice out there.
How does it look?
Milwaukee.
Very good.
Okay, so we can wrap this up in about five or ten minutes.
And stir up.
Yeah.
Phil, do you want something?
No.
Sure.
I'm drinking a bottle of water and I'm going to float away.
It's a hangover, you know.
Hangover?
What's this thing with Norman Mailer?
Is there something with you with Norman Mailer?
I'm on excellent terms with Mailer.
Now, although there was a time when, it was actually a wonderful story,
He accused Christopher Hitchens, Ian Hamilton, the biographer, and me of being a homosexual mafia.
Don't make me laugh.
There goes the white shirt.
Homosexual mafia controlling the English letter.
Then at the pen party, Christopher Hitchens looked drunkenly around the room on his way out to catch an airplane and saw Mailer in the corner.
So he went lurching and berthing over to Mailer and sort of spun him around and said,
I read that piece where you said that me and Martin Amos and Ian Hamilton were homosexual and that bit.
I just want you to know I think it's funny I started reading Hamilton.
And I went lurching and burping off thinking, that didn't come out at all right.
Do you have a vision of society that you're addressing this problem?
No, it's kind of an anti-vision.
All I'm saying is why is it like this when it could have been
so many other things.
Why this way wrong?
Why have we done it this way wrong?
And how this applies to the male ego and the male set of emotions.
If you'd gone up to a caveman and said, I'm from the future, and what we're going to do is fix things so that men are going to spend 40 years of their lives
sitting in an office trying to do down other men.
How does that sound?
And I'm sure he'd say, find another way, you know, kind of be more firm than that, kind of be more varied than that.
Is it, in fact, endemic among writers to really, the less successful ones, to really resent the success of the... I think so.
I think it's part of the job.
To the point that... Not to that point.
but to even consider... See, now we are really becoming... That is the great element of exaggeration.
That's the kind of satire of it.
That's the satire.
The reification of it.
What if you really did just follow it through?
Instead of nursing this envy and resentment and being silent about it, as all of us are, it's not considered civilized...
Envy is never candid.
Envy never says, I'm envy.
This is what this emotion is, is envy.
It says, I'm high-minded.
Or, I have pure standards for you.
Or, you know, find some other form.
This is what we do with our envy.
We translate it into something else.
Different kinds of aggression.
But if you just come out and say, I am envy,
uh that it gets looked at very differently because i love the fact that that which is reviewing books and uh editing uh yeah and the little magazine and the vanity press he really has the toilet end of the market i think we got plenty of stuff and if you would would you kindly inscribe a book
I got one for my .